# Chapter 1: Lambda Calculus

## Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 1: Lambda Calculus** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 1.1 All You Need is Lambda

A calculus is a method of calculation or reasoning. The lambda calculus formalizes the concept of effective computability, thus determining which problems, or classes of problems, can be solved.

## 1.2 What is functional programming?

Functional programs are a combination of expressions. Expressions include concrete values, variables, and functions. Functions are expressions that are applied to an argument or input, and once applied, can be reduced or evaluated. In functional programming, functions are **first-class** in that they can be used as values or passed as arguments (or inputs) to more functions. Functional programming languages are all based on the lambda calculus.

Haskell is a pure functional language because it does not incorporate features into the language that are not translatable into lambda expressions. The word **purity** also means **referential integrity**. **Referential integrity** means given the same input, the same function will always return the same result.

## 1.3 What is a function?

A function is a relation between a set of possible inputs and a set of possible outputs. Given the same input, the output of a function should be predictable when you know the function definition. You cannot have different outputs for a given input. You can have different inputs given the same output.

## 1.4 The structure of lambda terms

The lambda calculus has three (3) basic components or lambda terms:

1. Expressions
2. Variables
3. Abstractions

### Expressions

An expression can be a variable name, an abstraction, or a combination of a variable name and abstraction. The simplest expression is a single variable. Variables have no meaning or value and are only names for potential inputs to functions.

### Abstractions

An abstraction is a function. An abstraction is a lambda term that has a head (a lambda) and a body. An abstraction consists of two parts: the head and the body. The head of the function is a $`\lambda`$ followed by a variable name. The body of the function is another expression.

```math
\lambda x . x
```

The variable named in the head is the **parameter** and **binds** all instances of that same variable in the body of the function. The lambda abstraction $`\lambda x . x`$ has no name. It is anonymous function. The dot (.) separates the parameters of the lambda from the function body.

### Alpha Equivalence

```math
\lambda x . x
```

The `x` in $`\lambda x . x`$ is not semantically meaningful, so there is a form of equivalence between lambda terms. $`\lambda x . x`$ is the same as $`\lambda c.c`$

## 1.5 Beta Reduction

**Beta reduction** is the process of applying a lambda term to an argument by replacing the bound variables with the value of the argument, and eliminating the head. We use $`[x := z ]`$ to indicate that z will substitute for all occurrences of x. Applications in the lambda calculus are **left associative**.

## Free variables

A free variable is a variable found in the body that is not named in the head of the function. A bound variable is a variable found in the body that is named in the head of the function.

```math
\lambda x . x y
```

`x` is a bound variable. `y` is a free variable.

## 1.6 Multiple arguments

Each lambda can only bind one parameter and can only accept one argument. Functions that require multiple arguments have multiple, nested heads. **Currying** is the process of transforming a function that takes multiple arguments into a function that takes just a single argument and returns another function if any arguments are still needed.

## 1.7 Evaluation is simplification

**Beta normal form** is when you cannot beta reduce (apply lambdas to arguments) the terms any further.

## 1.8 Combinators

A combinator is a lambda term with no free variables. Combinators serve only to combine the arguments they are given.

## 1.9 Divergence

Divergence occurs when the reduction process never terminates or ends. Divergence occurs when reducing terms does not converge to beta normal form. Example of a lambda term called *omega* that diverges is $`(\lambda x.xx)(\lambda x.xx)`$.

## 1.10 Summary

Haskell is a typed lambda calculus.

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
2. [Currying](https://wiki.haskell.org/Currying)

## Further Reading

1. [A Lambda Calculus Primer](https://ebzzry.io/en/lambda-calculus/)
2. [The Implementation of Functional Programming Languages - Simon L. Peyton Jones](http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/simonpj/papers/slpj-book-1987/)