# Chapter 3: Strings

## Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 3: Strings** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 3.1 Printing strings

`String` is a type of data.

## 3.2 A first look at types

Types are a way of categorizing values. Strings are lists of characters. 

We use `:t` or `:type` in GHCi to find out the type of a value, expression, or function.

Characters are enclosed in single quotes.

`::` is read as **"has the type"**. Whenever you see the double colon, you are looking at a type signature. A type signature is a line of code that defines the type for a value, expression, or function. We use double quotes for a string. `String` is a type alias or type synonym for a list of `Char`.

## 3.3 Printing simple Strings

`putStrLn` function prints to the current line, then starts a new line. `putStr` function prints to the current line, but does not start a new line. `print` function prints string to the display with the quotation marks still around it. `print` function can print different types of data to the screen. To __concatenate__ something means to link together. We use `(++)` and `concat` functions to concatenate strings.

## 3.4 Top-level vs local definitions

Top-level declarations are not nested within anything else and they are in scope throughout the whole module. To be locally defined means the declaration is nested within some other expression and is not visible outside that expression.

## 3.5 Types of concatenation functions

`(++)` function is an infix operator. `++` has the type `[a] -> [a] -> [a]` `concat` has the type `[[a]] -> [a]`. Read `Foldable t => t [a]` as being `[[a]]`.

## 3.6 Concatenation and scoping

`(++)` is right associative.

## 3.7 More list functions

* The `:` operator, called "cons", builds a list.
* `head` function returns the head or first element of a list.
* `tail` functions returns the list with the head chopped off.
* `take` returns the specified number of elements from the list, starting from the left.
* `drop` returns the remainder of the list after the specified number of elements has been dropped.
* `!!` returns the element that is in the specified position in the list. Indices start from 0 (zero) in Haskell.

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
