# Chapter 4: Basic Datatypes

## Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 4: Basic Datatypes** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 4.1 Basic Datatypes

Types, also called datatypes, provides the means to build programs more quickly and allows for greater ease of maintenance.

## 4.2 What are types?

Evaluated expressions reduce to values. Every value has a type. Types are how we group a set of values together that share something in common.

## 4.3 Anatomy of a data declaration

Data declarations are how datatypes are defined. The type constructor is the name of the type and is capitalized. Type constructors appear at the type level (type signatures) of your code. Data constructors are the values that inhabit the type they are defined in. Data constructors appear at the term level (the values your code evaluates to) of your code.

```haskell
-- The whole code below is called a data declaration.
data Bool = False | True
-- Bool is the type constructor.
-- False and True are the data constructors.
```

Data declarations have the keyword `data` followed by the type constructor, the equals sign to denote a definition, and then data constructors.

Use `:info` to find the datatype definition for built-in datatypes.

## 4.4 Numeric types

Numeric datatypes all have instances of the `Num` typeclass. Typeclasses are a way of of adding functionality to types that is reusable across all the types that have instances of that typeclass. An instance defines how the functions work for that specific type.

### Integral numbers

These are whole numbers, positive and negative. They have no fractional component.

#### Int

This is a fixed-precision integer. It has a range with a maximum and a minimum. We find the minimum and maximum bounds of numeric types using `maxBound` and `minBound` from the `Bounded` typeclass.

```haskell
Prelude> import GHC.Int
Prelude> :t minBound
minBound :: Bounded a => a
Prelude> minBound :: Int8
-128
Prelude> :t maxBound
maxBound :: Bounded a => a
Prelude> maxBound :: Int8
127
```

We find if a type has an instance of `Bounded` by using `:info` in GHCi.

#### Integer

Integer supports arbitrarily large (or small) numbers.

### Fractional numbers

#### Float

It is used for single-precision floating point numbers.

#### Double

This is a double-precision floating point number type.

#### Rational

This is a fractional number that represents a ratio of two integers e.g. `1 / 2 :: Rational`.

#### Scientific

This is a space efficient and almost-arbitrary precision scientific number type. Arbitrary precision means that it can be used to do calculations requiring a high degree of precision rather than being limited to a specific degree of precision. It is represented using scientific notation. It stores the coefficient as an Integer and the exponent as an Int. It is available in a library: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/scientific. It can be installed using `cabal install` or `stack install`. We use this datatype for production code to avoid coding around the quirks that exist with floating point arithmetic.

## 4.5 Comparing values

We use `(==)` function to test for "is equal to". We use `(/=)` function to test for "is not equal to". `(==)` and `(/=)` belong to the `Eq` typeclass. `Eq` typeclass includes everything that can be compared and determined to be equal in value. `Ord` typeclass includes all things that can be ordered. Comparison functions are polymorphic and can work with a lot of different types.

## 4.6 Go on and Bool me

Haskell does not have an `if` statements, but it does have `if` expressions. `if` always evaluates to a value.

## 4.7 Tuples

It allows you to store and pass around multiple values within a single value. Each tuple has a fixed number of constituents. We refer to tuples by how many constituents are in each tuple. This number is also known as the tuple's arity. The two-tuple in Haskell provides convenient functions for getting the first or second value. For two-tuple, the constructors you use in the type signatures and in your code (terms) are syntactically identical even though they are different things.

```haskell
fst :: (a, b) -> a
snd :: (a, b) -> b
```

## 4.8 Lists

Unlike tuple, all constituents of a list must be of the same type. Lists have their own distinct `[]` syntax. `[]` used for both the type constructor in type signatures and at the term level to express list values. The number of constituents within a list can change as you operate on the list, unlike tuples where the arity is set in the type and immutable.

## 4.10 Definitions

1. A tuple is an ordered grouping of values.
2. A typeclass is a set of operations defined with respect to a polymorphic type.
3. Data constructors in Haskell provide a means of creating values that inhabit a given type.
4. Type constructors in Haskell are not values and can only be used in type signatures.
5. Data declarations define new datatypes in Haskell.
6. A type alias is a way to refer to a type constructor or type constant by an alternative name.
7. Arity is the number of arguments a function accepts. In Haskell, all functions are 1-arity and handle accepting multiple arguments by nesting functions.
8. polymorphism in Haskell means being able to write code in terms of values which may be one of several, or any type. polymorphism in Haskell is either *parametric* or *constrained (bounded)*.

## 4.11 Names and Variables

In Haskell, there are 7 categories of entities that have names: functions, term-level variables, data constructors, type variables, type constructors, typeclasses, and modules. Type variables are variables in type signatures. Functions, term-level variables, and data constructors exist at the term-level. Type variables, type constructors, and typeclasses exist at the type-level. Modules are used to organize our code into coherent groupings across different files.

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
