# Chapter 5: Types - Notes

## Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 5: Types** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 5.1 Types

A datatype declaration defines a type constructor and data constructors. Data constructors are the values of a particular type. Data constructors are also functions that let us create data or values of a particular type.

## 5.2 What are types for?

Type systems in logic and mathematics have been designed to impose constraints that enforce correctness. Haskell is statically typed which means type checking occurs at compile time. Static typing allows many errors to be caught before the program is executed. Good type systems can also enable compiler optimizations. Types can also serve as documentation of your program.

## 5.3 How to read type signatures

We use `:type` or `:t` in `GHCi` to query the type of the data constructors (or values). The arrow, `(->)`, is the type constructor for functions in Haskell. The arrow is a type constructor that takes argument and has no data constructors. The function type has no data constructors. The value that shows up at term level is the function. **Functions are values**. The arrow is an **infix operator** that has two parameters and **associates to the right**, although **function application is left associative**. Each typeclass offers a standard set of functions that can be used across several concrete types.

## 5.4 Currying

All functions in Haskell take one argument and return one result. Currying refers to the nesting of multiple functions, each accepting one argument and returning one result, to allow the illusion of multiple-parameter functions. Each arrow in a type signature represents one argument and one result, with the final type being the final result. Partial application is the ability to apply only some of a function's arguments.

Haskell is curried by default, but you can uncurry functions. Uncurrying means un-nesting the functions and replacing the two functions with a tuple of two values.

* Uncurried functions: one function, many arguments.
* Curried functions: Many functions, one argument apiece.

Functions that seem to accept multiple arguments are higher-order functions. Sectioning refers to partial application of infix operators, which has a special syntax and allows you to choose whether the argument you are partially applying the operator to is the first or second argument. You can also use the sectioning syntax with functions that are normally prefix if you use the backticks to make them infix.

## 5.5 Polymorphism

Polymorphic means "made of many forms". Monomorpic means "made of one form". Polymorphic type variables enables us to implement expressions that can accept arguments and return results of different types without having to write variations on the same expression for each type.

Type signatures have three kinds of types:

* concrete e.g. `Integer`
* constrained Polymorphic e.g `Num a => a`
* parametrically Polymorphic e.g. `a`

In Haskell, Polymorphism divides into two categories:

* parametric polymorphism
* constrained polymorphism (ad-hoc polymorphism)

Parametric polymorphism is broader than ad-hoc polymorphism. It refers to type variables or parameters that are fully polymorphic. When unconstrained by a typeclass, the final concrete type could be any datatype. Fully polymorphic parameters are unconstrained by a typeclass.

Contrained polymorphism puts typeclass constraints on the variable. It decreases the number of concrete types it could be, but increases what you can actually do with it by defining and bringing into scope a set of operations.

A polymorphic type variable is a lowercase name in a type signature e.g `a` or `t`. A specific concrete type is capitalized e.g `Bool`.

The identity function (`id`) is a parametric polymorphic function. A type variable represents a set of possible types. When there is no typeclass constraint, the set of possible types a variable could represent is effectively unlimited. A function is polymorphic when its type signature has variables that can represent more than one type, that is, its parameters are polymorphic.

Parametricity is the property we get from having parametric polymorphism. The behavior of a function with respect to the types of its parametrically polymorphic arguments is uniform. The behavior of the function cannot change just because it was applied to an argument of a different type.

## 5.6 Type Inference

Haskell has type inference. Type inference is an algorithm for determining the types of expressions. Haskell's type inference is built on an extended version of the Damas-Hindley-Milner type system. Haskell will infer the most generally applicable (polymorphic) type that is still correct.

## 5.7 Asserting types for declarations

Adding type signatures to code can provide us guidance as we write functions. It helps the compiler to give us information about where our code is gone wrong. We assert a type by adding double colon and the type after the value you want to assert a type for.

```haskell
Prelude> let triple x = x * 3 :: Integer -- 3 is asserted as an integer
Prelude> :t triple
triple :: Integer -> Integer
```

## 5.9 Definitions

* Polymorphism refers to type variables which may refer to more than one concrete type.
* Type inference enables Haskell to infer principal types from terms without needing explicit type annotations.
* Type variable is a way to refer to an unspecified type or set of types in Haskell type signatures.
* A typeclass is a means of expressing faculties or interfaces that multiple datatypes may have in common.
* Parametricity is the property that holds in the presence of parametric Polymorphism. Parametricity states that the behavior of a function will be uniform across all concrete applications of the function.
* Ad-hoc Polymorphism (sometimes called "constrained Polymorphism") is Polymorphism that applies to one or more typeclass constraints to what would have otherwise been a parametrically polymorphic type variable.
* A module is the unit of organization that the Haskell programming language uses to collect together declarations of values. functions, data types, typeclasses, and type instances.

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
