# Chapter 6: Typeclasses - Notes

## Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 6: Typeclasses** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 6.1 Typeclasses

Some important predefined classes include `Eq`, `Num`, `Ord`, `Enum`, and `Show`.

## 6.2 What are typeclasses?

Typeclasses allows us to generalize over a set of types in order to define and execute a standard set of features for those types. Instance of a typeclass means that there is a code that defines how the values and functions from that typeclass work for that type.

## 6.3 Back to Bool

1. `Bounded` for types that have an upper and lower bound
2. `Enum` for things that can be enumerated.
3. `Eq` for things that can be tested for equality.
4. `Ord` for things that can be put into a sequential order.
5. `Read` parses strings into things. Don't use it!
6. `Show` renders things into strings.

## 6.4 Eq

Equality is implemented with a typeclass called `Eq`. Any type that has an instance of the typeclass `Eq` implements the methods of the typeclass. Typeclass instances we can derive are the following: `Eq`, `Ord`, `Enum`, `Bounded`, `Read`, and `Show`. Deriving means we don't have to manually write instances of these typeclasses for each new datatype we create.

## 6.5 Writing typeclass instances

Investigate a typeclass by referring to the Hackage documentation for that typeclass.

```haskell
module Trivial where

data Trivial = Trivial'

instance Eq Trivial where
-- [1]   [2]   [3]   [4]
  (==) Trivial' Trivial' = True
-- [           5                ]  
```

1. The keyword `instance` begins a declaration of a typeclass instance.
2. The first name to follow the instance is the typeclass the instance is providing. In this case, `Eq`.
3. The type the instance is being provided for. In this case, we are implementing the `Eq` typeclass for the `Trivial` datatype.
4. The keyword `where` terminates the initial declaration and beginning of the instance
5. Methods (functions) being implemented

A partial application is different from a partial function. A partial function is one that does not handle all the possible cases, so there are possible scenarios in which we have not defined any way for the code to evaluate. To turn all warnings on, use the `Wall` flag in GHCi.

```haskell
Prelude> :set -Wall
```

## 6.6 Num

Any type that implements `Integral` must already have instances for `Real` and `Enum` typeclasses. An integral type must be both a real number and enumerable and therefore may employ the methods each of those typeclasses. The `Real` typeclass itself requires an instance of `Num`. Typeclass inheritance is only additive. `Num` is a superclass of `Fractional`. Anything that provides an instance of `Fractional` must by definition also already have an instance of `Num`.

## 6.7 Type-defaulting typeclasses

In cases when we have not specified a concrete type for a polymorphic value, the typeclass will default to a concrete type, and the default types are already set in the libraries. We can declare more specific (monomorphic) functions from more general (polymorphic) functions, but we cannot go in the other direction.

## 6.8 Ord

`Ord` is constrained by `Eq` because if you are going to compare items in a list and put them in order, you need a way to determine if they are equal. So `Ord` requires `Eq` and its methods. It is wise to ensure that your `Ord` instances agree with your `Eq` instances, whether the `Eq` instances are derived or manually written. Ensure that your `Ord` instances define a sensible total order by covering all cases and avoid writing partial instances. `Ord` should be written such that, when `compare x y` returns `LT`, then `compare y x` returns `GT`. Anything that provides an instance of `Ord` must by definition also already have an instance of `Eq`. `Eq` is a superclass of `Ord`. Usually, we use the *minimally sufficient* set of constraints on all your functions.

## 6.9 Enum

This typeclass covers types that are enumerable, therefore have known predecessors and successors.

## 6.10 Show

The `Show` typeclass provides for the creation of human-readable string representations of structured data. GHCi uses `Show` to create `String` values it can print in the terminal. `Show` is not a serialization format. serialization is how data is rendered to a textual or binary format for persistence or communicating with other computers over a network. 

`()` denotes an empty tuple, which is referred to as *unit*. Unit is a value, and also a type that has only this one inhabitant, that essentially represents nothing.

## 6.11 Read

This typeclass takes strings and turns them into things. `read` is not suitable for serialization.`read` is a partial function, a function that does not return a proper value as a result of all possible inputs.

## 6.12 Instances are dispatched by type

Typeclasses are defined by the set of operations and values all instances will provide. Typeclass instances are unique pairings of the typeclass and a type. The typeclass instances define the ways to implement the typeclass methods for that type.

Things to remember here:

* A typeclass defines a set of functions and/or values
* Types have instances of that typeclass
* The instances specify the ways that type uses the functions of that typeclass.

## 6.13 Gimme more operations

Having no constraint on our term-level values means they could be any type, but there is not much we can do with them since the methods and operations are in the typeclasses. We get more utility by specifying typeclass constraints. Concrete types imply all the typeclasses they provide.

## 6.15 Chapter Definitions

1. *Typeclass inheritance* is when a typeclass has a superclass. This is a way of expressing that a typeclass requires another typeclass to be available for a given type before you can write an instance.
2. *Side effects* are how we refer to observable actions programs may take other than compute a value.
3. *IO* is the type of values whose evaluation bears the possibility of causing side effects.
4. An *instance* is the definition of how a typeclass should work for a given type. Instances are unique for a given combination of typeclass and type.
5. *Derived instances* are used to have common or obvious instances generated hased only on how the datatype is defined.

## 6.16 Typeclass inheritance, partial

[Sample Typeclass Inheritance](ch06/typeclasses.svg)

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
2. [Classes and Types](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Haskell/Classes_and_types)
