# Chapter 7: More functional patterns - Notes

## Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 7: More functional patterns** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 7.1 Make it func-y

A function is an instruction for producing an output from an input or argument. Functions are applied to arguments which binds the parameters of the function to values. Fully applied function with its arguments is evaluated to produce output or result.

## 7.2 Arguments and parameters

Functions are defined by the fact that they can be applied to an argument and return a result. All Haskell values can be arguments to functions. A value that can be used as an argument to a function is a first-class value.

You name parameters to functions in Haskell by declaring them between the name of the function, which is always at the left margin and the equal signs, separating the name from both the function name and the equal sign with white space. The name used for the parameter is a variable. When we apply the function to an argument, the value of the argument is bound with the named parameter (variable) in our function definition.

Haskell is lexically scoped. Lexical scoping means that resolving the value for a named entity depends on the location in the code and the lexical context, e.g. in `let` and `where` clauses. The lexically innermost binding for a variable of a particular name always takes precedence.

## 7.3 Anonymous Functions

It allows us to construct functions and use them without giving them a name. To apply an anonymous function, we often need to wrap it in parentheses so that our intent is clear.

## 7.4 Pattern matching

Pattern matching is a way of matching values against patterns and, where appropriate, binding variables to successful matches. Pattern matching matches on any and all data constructors. Patterns are matched against values, or data constructors, not types. Pattern matching proceeds from left to right and outside to inside.

One can enter function directly into GHCi using the `:{` and `:}` block syntax.`_` is a means of defining a universal pattern that never fails to match, a sort of "anything else" case.

The order of pattern matches matters. Order your patterns from most specific to least specific, particularly as it concerns the use of `-` to unconditionally match any value. Incomplete pattern matches applied to data they don't handle will return *bottom*, a non-value used to denote that the program cannot return a value or result. Returning `bottom` will throw an exception, which if unhandled, will make your program to fail.

`newtype` is a special case of data declarations. It permits only one constructor and only one field.

Use `:browse` to see a list of the type signatures and functions loaded from a module.

## 7.5 Case expressions

We use case expressions to write functions that handle all possible inputs.

## 7.6 Higher-order functions

Higher-order functions (HOFs) are functions that accept functions as arguments since functions are just values. To express a function argument within a function type, we must use parentheses to nest it.

## 7.7 Guards

Guard syntax allows us to write compact functions that allow for two or more possible outcomes depending on the truth of the conditions. Guards always evaluate sequentially, so your guards should be ordered from the case that is most restrictive to the case that is least restrictive.

## 7.8 Function composition

Function composition is a type of higher-order function that allows us to combine functions such that the result of applyong one function gets passed to the next function as an argument. The basic syntax of function composition looks like this:

```haskell
(f . g) x = f (g x)
```

The composition operator `(.)` takes two functions here, named `f` and `g`. `f . g` can always be called as **"f after g"** for memory sake.

## 7.9 Pointfree style

Pointfree refers to a style of composing functions without specifying their arguments. The "point" in "pointfree" refers to the arguments, not to the function composition operator. Pointfree code is tidier on the page and easier to read as it helps the reader focus on the functions rather than the data that is being shuffled around.

## 7.10 Demonstrating composition

The function `print` is the composition of `show` and `putStrLn`. When we are working with functions primarily in terms of *composition* rather than *application*, the pointfree version can sometimes (not always) be more elegant.

## 7.12 Chapter Definitions

1. Binding or bound is used to indicate connection, linkage, or association between two objects. In Haskell, for example, a paramter is *bound* to an argument value.
2. An *anonymous* function is a function which is not bound to an identifier and is instead passed as an argument to another function and/or used to construct another function.
3. *Currying* is the process of transforming a function that takes multiple arguments into a series of functions which each take one argument and return one result. This is accomplished through nesting.
4. *Pattern matching* is a syntactic way of deconstructing product and sum types to get at their inhabitants.
5. *Bottom* is a non-value used to denote that the program cannot return a value or result.
6. *Higher-order functions* are functions which themselves take functions as arguments or return fuctions as results.
7. *Composition* is the application of a function to the result of having applied another function.
8. *Pointfree* is programming tacitly, or without mentioning arguments by name. The "point" referred to in the term "pointfree" is an argument.

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
