# Chapter 8: Recursion* - Notes

## Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 8: Recursion** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 8.1 Recursion

Recursion is defining a function in terms of itself via self-referential expressions. Recursion is a means of expressing code that must take an indefinite number of steps to return a result. We use a combinator - known as the Y combinator or fixed-point combinator - to write recursive functions in the lambda calculus.

## 8.2 Factorial

The base case must be an identity value for the function so that applying the function to that case does not change the result of previous applications. Recursion is self-referential composition. We apply a function to an argument, then pass the result of that application to a second application of the same function and so on until we get to the base case.

## 8.3 Bottom

`bottom`, or (&#8869;), or  written in text as `(_|_)` is a term used in Haskell to refer to computations that do not successfully result in a value. The two main varieties of bottom are computations that failed with an error or those that failed to terminate. A total function is a function that handles all of its inputs. A partial function is one which does not handle all of its inputs. One way to make a function into a total function is with the use of the datatype Maybe

```haskell
data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a
```

## 8.4 Fibonacci numbers

Steps for writing a recursive function are thus:

1. Consider the types.
2. Consider the base case. The base case must be an identity function.
3. Consider the arguments.
4. Consider the recursion.

## 8.5 Integral division from scratch

The use of type synonyms can improve the clarity and purpose of your type signatures.

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
2. [The Y Combinator (no, not that one)](https://medium.com/@ayanonagon/the-y-combinator-no-not-that-one-7268d8d9c46)
3. [The Y Combinator (Slight Return)](https://mvanier.livejournal.com/2897.html)
