# Chapter 11: Algebraic Datatypes - Notes

## Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 11: Algebraic Datatypes** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 11.1 Algebraic datatypes

A type can be thought of as an enumeration of constructors with zero or more arguments.

## 11.2 Data declarations review

Creating custom types allows us to focus first on how we model the domain (using types) before we begin thinking of how we want to write the computations to solve the problem. Creating custom types also make our code easier to read and use because it lays the domain model out clearly.

A data constructor that takes no arguments is called a *nullary* constructor.

## 11.3 Data and type constructors

There are two kinds of constructors:

+ Type constructors are used only at the type level, in type signatures, and typeclass declarations and instances.
+ Data constructors are used at term level.

Constants are type and data constructors that take no arguments. When a constructor takes an argument, it is like a function - it must be applied to become a concrete type or value.

## 11.4 Type constructors and kinds

Kinds are the types of types or types one level up. Kinds are represented in Haskell as `*`. Fully applied, concrete type is represented as `*`. Type waiting to be applied is like a function and is represented as `* -> *`. 

Use `:kind` or `:k` in GHCi to query the kind signature of a type constructor (not a data constructor).

## 11.5 Data constructors and values

The data constructor can have the same name as the type constructor, but they are not the same thing. We query the type (using `:t` or `:type`) of the value (that is, the data constructor), and not the type constructor. We query the kind (unsing `:k` or `:kind`) of the type constructor.

## 11.6 What's a type and what' data?

Types are static and resolve at compile time. By static, we mean that types are known before runtime whether through explicit declaration or type inference. Both type constructors and data constructors begin with uppercase letters. A constructor before the `=` in a datatype definition is a type constructor. A constructor after the `=` in a datatype definition is a data constructor. When data constructors take arguments, those arguments refer to other types. Data constructors can take arguments - those arguments will be specific types, but not specific values.

## 11.7 Data constructor arities

Arity refers to the number of arguments a function or constructor takes. A nullary function takes no argument. A unary function takes one argument. A binary function takes two arguments. A ternary function takes three arguments.

Data constructors that take more than one argument are referred to as _products_. Tuples can take several arguments & are considered the canonical product type; they are *anonymous products* because they have no name.

## 11.8 What makes these datatypes algebraic?

Algebraic datatypes in Haskell are algebraic because we can describe the patterns of argument structures using two basic operations: *sum* and *product*. The cardinality of a datatype is the number of possible values it defines. Datatypes that only contain a unary constructor always have the same cardinality as the type they contain.

```haskell
-- Here the data constructor Goats has the same number of inhabitants as Int.
data Goats = Goats Int deriving (Eq, Show)
```

## 11.9 newtype

`newtype` can only ever have a single unary data constructor. The cardinality of a `newtype` is the same as that of the type it contains. It cannot be a product type or sum type. It cannot contain nullary constructors. It has no runtime overhead because it is not allowed to be a record (product type) or tagged union (sum type). A `newtype` is similar to a type synonym in that the representation of the named type and the type it contains are identical and any distinction between them is gone at compile time. One key contrast between a newtype and a type alias is that you can define typeclass instances for newtypes that differ from the instances for their underlying type.

### Language Pragma

Language pragmas, also called extensions, are special instructions to the compiler. Language pragmas tell the compiler to process input in ways beyond what the standard provides for. Use a language pragma called `GeneralizedNewtypeDeriving` to be able to reuse the typeclass instances of the type our new type contains. Without this pragma, we will have to define the instance for the `newtype` type. We also can use this for times when we want every typeclass instance to be the same except for the one we want to change.

## 11.10 Sum types

`|` (logical disjunction, that is, "or") is the sum in algebraic datatypes. To know the cardinality of sum types, we add the cardinalities of their data constructors.

## 11.11 Product Types

A product type's cardinality is the product of the cardinalities of its inhabitants. A product type express `and`. Arithmetically, products are the result of multiplication. Type alias create type constructors, not data constructors. The reason to understand cardinality is that the cardinality of a datatype roughly equates to how difficult it is to reason about.

### Record Syntax

Records in Haskell are product types with additional syntax to provide convenient accessors to fields within the record. For example,

```haskell
data Person =
  Person {
      name :: String
    , age :: Int
} deriving (Eq, Show)

jm, ca :: Person
jm = Person "julie" 108
ca = Person "chris" 16
```

```haskell
Prelude> name jm
"julie"
Prelude> age jm
108
```

## 11.12 Normal Form

In normal arithmetic, an expression is in normal form when it has been reduced to a final result. Product types distribute over sum types.

## 11.13 Constructing and deconstructing values

Two things we can do with a value:
    1. generate or construct it
    2. match on it and consume it

Avoid using type synonyms with unstructured data like text or binary. Type synonyms are best used when you want something lighter weight than newtypes but also want your type signatures to be more explicit. You can construct values of products that use record syntax in a manner identical to that of non-record products. Records are just syntax to create field references.

## 11.14 Function type is exponential

In the arithmetic of calculating inhabitants of types, function type is the exponent operation. Given a function `a -> b`, we can calculate the inhabitants with the formula b^a^. Given a function `a -> b -> c`, we can calculate the inhabitants with the formula `(c ^ b) ^ a = c ^ (b * a)`

## 11.15 Higher-kinded datatypes

Kinds are the types of type constructors, primarily encoding the number of arguments they take. The default kind in Haskell is `*`. Kind signatures work like type signatures, using the same `::` and `->` syntax. Kinds are not types until they are fully applied. The kind `* -> *` is waiting for a single `*` before it is fully applied. The kind `* -> * -> *` must be applied twice before it is fully applied. This is known as a *higher-kinded type*.

## 11.16 Lists are polymorphic

What makes lists polymorphic is that lists in Haskell can contain values of any type. 

When we give an operator a non-alphanumeric name, it is infix by default. Any operator that starts with a colon (:) must be an infix type or data constructor. All infix data constructors must start with a colon. 

The type constructor of functions (`->`) is the only infix type constructor that does not start with a colon. 

Note that `::` is reserved for type assertions.

## 11.17 Binary Tree

Binary tree is a type similar to list. It is recursive. The type constructor for binary trees can take an argument.

```haskell
data  BinaryTree a =
    Leaf
  | Node (BinaryTree a) a (BinaryTree a)
  deriving (Eq, Ord, Show)
```

## 11.19 Definitions

A *datatype* is how we declare and create data for our functions to receive an inputs. Datatype declarations begin with the keyword `data`. A datatype is made up of a type constructor and zero or more data constructors which each have zero or more arguments.

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
2. [The Algebra of Algebraic Data Types](http://chris-taylor.github.io/blog/2013/02/10/the-algebra-of-algebraic-data-types/)
