# Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 12: Signaling Adversity** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 12.1 Signaling Adversity

We can use explicit datatypes like `Maybe` and `Either` to signal when our functions received a combination of inputs that do not make sense.

## 12.2 How I learned to stop worrying and love Nothing

```haskell
data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a
```

We use `Maybe` type to return a default `Nothing` value when we don't have any sensible value to return for our intended type `a`.

```haskell
ifEvenAdd2 :: Integer -> Maybe Integer
ifEvenAdd2 n = if even n then Just (n + 2) else Nothing
```

A smart constructor allows us to construct values of a type only when they meet certain criteria, so that we know when we have a valid value, and return an explicit signal when we do not.

## 12.3 Bleating Either

```haskell
data Either a b = Left a | Right b
```

Case expressions and pattern matching will work without an `Eq` instance, but guards using `(==)` will not work without an `Eq` instance. The `Left` of `Either` is used as our invalid or error constructor, that is, for whatever case that is going to cause the work to stop. By convention, we use the Left of Either to indicate the invalid case and the Right of Either to indicate the valid case.

```haskell
type Name = String
type Age = Integer
type ValidatePerson a = Either [PersonInvalid] a

data Person = Person Name Age deriving Show

data PersonInvalid = NameEmpty
                    | AgeTooLow
                    deriving (Eq, Show)

ageOkay :: Age -> Either [PersonInvalid] Age
ageOkay age = case age >= 0 of
  True -> Right age
  False -> Left [AgeTooLow]

nameOkay :: Name -> Either [PersonInvalid] Name
nameOkay name = case name /= "" of
  True -> Right name
  False -> Left [NameEmpty]

mkPerson :: Name -> Age -> ValidatePerson Person
mkPerson name age =
  mkPerson' (nameOkay name) (ageOkay age)

mkPerson' :: ValidatePerson Name
          -> ValidatePerson Age
          -> ValidatePerson Person
mkPerson' (Right nameOk) (Right ageOk) =
  Right (Person nameOk ageOk)
mkPerson' (Left badName) (Left badAge) =
  Left (badName ++ badAge)
mkPerson' (Left badName) _ = Left badName
mkPerson' _ (Left badAge) = Left badAge
```

## 12.4 Kinds, a thousand stars in your types

Kinds are types one level up. Kinds are used to describe the types of type constructors. Haskell has `higher-kinded types`. Type constructors (higher-kinded types) are types that take more types as arguments.

- `type constant` refer to types that take no arguments and are already types.
- `type constructor` is used to refer to types which must have arguments applied to become a type.

The kind `*` represents a concrete type. To be precise, kind `*` is the kind of all standard lifted types.

A lifted type includes any datatype you could define yourself. A lifted type can be inhabited by *bottom*. Lifted types are represented by a pointer.

kind `#` are unlifted types. Unlifted types are any type that cannot be inhabited by *bottom*. Unlifted types are often native machine types and raw pointers.

Newtypes are a special kind; they are unlifted (they cannot be inhabited by bottom) even though they are kind `*`.

The default kind of concrete, fully-applied datatypes in `GHC` is kind `*`. If a type constructor takes an argument(s), then the kind signature has an arrow(s), which signals a need for application.

```haskell
Prelude> data Trivial = Trivial
Prelude> :k Trivial
Trivial :: *

Prelude> data Unary a = Unary a
Prelude> :k Unary
Unary :: * -> *

Prelude> data TwoArgs a b = TwoArgs a b
Prelude> :k TwoArgs
TwoArgs :: * -> * -> *

Prelude> data ThreeArgs a b c = ThreeArgs a b c
Prelude> :k ThreeArgs
ThreeArgs :: * -> * -> * -> *
```

Data constructors that take arguments behave like functions

## 12.6 Definition

A **higher-kinded type** is any type whose kind has a function arrow in it and which can be described as a type constructor rather than a type constant.

Anamorphisms is the dual of catamorphisms. With folds, or catamorphisms, we break data structures down. With anamorphisms or unfolds, we build them up.

The following types are of a higher kind than `*`:

```haskell
Maybe :: * -> *
[] :: * -> *
Either :: * -> * -> *
(->) :: * -> * -> *
```

- The following types are not:

```haskell
Int :: *
Char :: *
String :: *
[Char] :: *
```

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
