# Chapter 13: Building Projects - Notes

## Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 13: Building Projects** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 13.1 Modules

Haskell programs are organized into __modules__. Modules contain datatypes, type synonyms, typeclasses, typeclass instances, and values defined at the top level. Modules offer a means to import other modules into the scope of your program. Modules contain values that can be exported to other modules.

## 13.2 Making packages with Stack

Cabal (Common Architecture for Building Applications and Libraries) is a package manager. Cabal helps us to organize our program. Cabal ensures all dependencies are properly in scope. Cabal exists primarily to describe a single package.

A package is a program with all of its modules and dependencies. Dependencies are interlinked elements of the program, other packages and libraries the program may depend on, and any tests and documentation associated with the project.

Stack is a cross-platform program that helps us to manage projects made up of multiple packages or individual packages. Stack relies on an LTS (long term support) snapshot of Haskell packages from [Stackage](https://www.stackage.org) that are guaranteed to work together.

## 13.3 Working with a basic project

Executables are applications that the operating system will run directly. Software libraries are code arranged in a manner so that they can be reused by the compiler in the building of other libraries and programs.

## 13.4 Making our project a library

We respect the boundaries of the library and executable by adding our own library as a dependency.

## 13.5 Module exports

Every top-level binding is exported and can be imported by another module when you don't specify any exports in a module.

## 13.6 More on importing modules

We use `:browse` command in GHCi to see what functions are included in the named module. Importing modules brings more functions into scope beyond those available in the standard `Prelude`. Imported modules are top-level declarations, which are in scope throughout the module, although they can be shadowed by local bindings. To turn `Prelude` off, we use `-XNoImplicitPrelude`:

```sh
$ stack ghci --ghci-options -XNoImplicitPrelude
Prelude>
```

### Qualified Imports

We use qualified imports to make the names of imports more explicit

```haskell
Prelude> import qualified Data.Bool
```

We use aliases or alternate names for modules when we qualify them so that we don't have to type out the full namespace.

```haskell
Prelude> import qualified Data.Bool as B
```

### Setting the Prelude prompt

Use `:set` command to set the prompt to whatever you prefer:

```haskell
Prelude> :set prompt "Lambda> "
Lambda>
```

## 13.7 Making our program interactive

`do` is a syntactic sugar. We use `do` inside functions that return `IO` in order to sequence side effects in a convenient syntax. `<-` in a `do` block is pronounced `bind`.

## 13.8 do syntax and IO

`do` blocks are convenient syntactic sugar suitable for sequencing actions. `do` blocks can make blocks of code more readable and hide the underlying nesting. `do` blocks can help you write effectual code before you understand monads and IO.

The `main` executable in a Haskell program must always have the type `IO ()`. `do` syntax allows us to sequence __monadic actions__. `do` syntax also provides a way for us to name values returned by monadic IO actions so that we can use them as inputs to actions that happen later in the program.

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
