# Chapter 15: Monoid, Semigroup

## Introduction

This is my notes from **Chapter 15: Monoid, Semigroup** of the book [Haskell Programming From First Principles](http://haskellbook.com).

## 15.1 Monoids and semigroups

Algebra means one or more `operations` and the `set` they operate over.

## 15.2 What we talk about when we talk about algebra

Algebra is the study of mathematical symbols and the rules governing their manipulation. In Haskell, algebras can be im plemented with typeclasses; the typeclasses define the set of operations. The instance defines how each operation will perform for a given type or set.

## 15.3 Monoid

A monoid is a binary associative operation with an identity. A monoid is a function that takes two arguments and follows two laws: associativity and identity. `Monoid` is the typeclass that generalizes these laws across types.

## 15.4 How Monoid is defined in Haskell

Typeclasses gives us a way to recognize, organize, and use common functionalities and patterns across types that differ in some ways but also have things in common. The `Monoid` typeclass abstracts and generalizes the monoidal pattern so that you can write codes in terms of any type that can be monoidally combined.

```haskell
class Monoid m where
  mempty  :: m
  mappend :: m -> m -> m
  mconcat :: [m] -> m
  mconcat = foldr mappend mempty
```  

`mappend` is how any two values that inhabit your type can be joined together. `mempty` is the identity value for the `mappend` operation.

## 15.5 Examples of using Monoid

List

```haskell
instance Semigroup [a] where
  (<>) = (++)

instance Monoid [a] where
  mempty = []

```

# 15.6 Why Integers doesn't have a Monoid

None of the numeric types have a `Monoid` instance because both summation and multiplication are monoid of numbers. Each type should only have one unique instance for a given typeclass, not two (i.e. once instance for a sum, one for a product.) Hence, we have the `Sum` and `Product` newtypes in `Data.Monoid` module to wrap numeric values and signal which monoid instance we want to use.

We usually enforce the unique instance rule by using `newtype` to separate the different monoidal behaviors. Using `newtype` constrains the datatype to having a single unary data constructor. `newtype` guarantees no additional runtime overhead in "wrapping" the original type. We use `newtype` to make it clear that we intend it to be a wrapper for the underlying type and that it will not grow into a more complicated sum or product type. We use `newtype` to improve type safety i.e. to avoid mixing up many values of the same representation, such as Text or Integer. We use `newtype` to add different typeclass instances to a type that is otherwise unchanged representationally, such as with Sum and Product.

The infix operator for mappend is `<>`.

## 15.7 Why bother

A common use of monoids is to structure and describe common modes of processing data. Using abelian or commutative monoid  when doing concurrent or distributed data processing ensures that intermediate results being computed in a different order won't change the eventual result.

## 15.8 Laws

Monoid instances must abide by the following laws:

1. left identity

    ```haskell
    mappend mempty x == x
    ```

2. right identity

    ```haskell
    mappend x mempty == x
    ```

3. associativity

    ```haskell
    mappend x (mappend y z) == mappend (mappend x y) z

    mconcat = foldr mappend mempty
    ```

## 15.9 Different instance, same representation

When we have more than one potential implementation for `Monoid` for a datatype, it is most convenient to use `newtypes` to tell them apart. For some other datatypes (apart from addition, list concatenation, and multiplication), the monoidal operation is more about finding a summary value for the set.

`All` for boolean conjunction and `Any` for boolean disjunction are the `newtypes` for Bool's Monoid.

The `Maybe` datatype has more than two possible `Monoids`. Instances include `First` and `Last`.

- `First` returns the first or leftmost non-Nothing value
- `Last` returns the last or rightmost non-Nothing value

## 15.10 Reusing algebras by asking for algebras

Associativity means that you can associate, or group, the arguments of your operation differently and the result will be the same. Commutativity means that you can reorder the arguments and still get the same result. Monoid abides by the law of associativity but not the law of commutativity, even though some monoidal operations (addition and multiplication) are commutative.

An identity is a value with a special relationship with an operation: it turns the operation into the identity function. There are no identities without operations. Identity is defined in terms of its relationship with a given operation.

Avoid writing orphan instances at all cost. An orphan instance is when an instance is defined for a datatype and typeclass, but not in the same module as iether the declaration of the typeclass or the datatype.

If you don't own the typeclass or the datatype, newtype it.

Solutions for addressing orphan instances are:

- You defined the type but not the typeclass? Put the instance in the same module as the type so that the type cannot be imported without its instances.
- You defined the typeclass but not the type? Put the instance in the same module as the typeclass definition so that the typeclass cannot be imported without its instances.
- Neither the type not the typeclass are yours? Define your own newtype wrapping the original type and define your instances for the newtype.

A type must have a unique (singular) implementation of a typeclass in scope.

## 15.11 Madness

Please, see [Madness Exercise](ch15/Madness.hs)

## 15.12 Better Living Through QuickCheck

Please, see [Maybe Another Monoid Exercise](MaybeAnotherMonoid).

## 15.13 Semigroup

To get from a `monoid` to a `semigroup`, we simply no longer furnish or require an identity. The core operation remains binary and associative. `Semigroup` still provides a binary associative operation, but does not have an identity value.

`NonEmpty` list type has a `Semigroup` instance, but cannot have a `Monoid` instance. It can never be an empty list.

```haskell
data NonEmpty a = a :| [a]
  deriving (Eq, Ord, Show)
```

`:|` is an infix data constructor that takes two type arguments. It is a product of `a` and `[a]`. Data constructors with only nonalphanumeric symbols and that begin with a colon are infix by default. Data constructors with alphanumeric names are prefix by default.

## 15.14 Strength can be weakness

The strength of an algebra means the number of operations the algebra provides which in turn expands what you can do with any given instance of that algebra without needing to know specifically what type you are working with.

Anything which is a monoid is by definition also a semigroup.

## References

1. [Haskell Programming from First Principles](http://haskellbook.com/)
2. [Haskell Monoids and their Uses](http://blog.sigfpe.com/2009/01/haskell-monoids-and-their-uses.html)
3. [How to test Semigroup law for this data type?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/41350192/how-to-test-semigroup-law-for-this-data-type)
